# Model-free Reinforcement Learning for

# Robust Locomotion using Demonstrations

# from Trajectory Optimization



**1.2 Contributions**

```
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
```
- We propose a framework to exploit the benefits of both TO and DRL to generate control policies
    that are robust to environmental uncertainties. A key aspect of our framework is to lose time-
    dependence from the initial trajectories and to build a policy that can adapt to large uncertainties
    in the environment.
- We implement two highly dynamic motions on a quadruped and show that our framework can deal
    with random uneven terrains as well as external disturbances. To the best of our knowledge, these
    results are the first demonstrating the successful use of DRL to robustly realize such behaviors.


Figure 1. Schematic of our proposed framework. We start from a single demonstration trajectory
generated by TO. In the first DRL stage we learn a policy that tracks that demonstration trajectory and
successfully produces nominal behavior in simulation. To enable transfer to the real robot, the second DRL
stage starts with the resulting policy from the first stage and tries to robustify the policy by randomizing
contact and to optimize for performance by replacing demonstration tracking reward with task reward.
We directly apply the output policy from the second stage to the robot without any domain randomization
of robot parameters.

## 2 PROPOSED ALGORITHM

Algorithm overview.Our proposed algorithm has three main parts as shown in Fig. 1. First we use TO
to generate efficiently, based on a nominal model of the robot, initial trajectories for new tasks. The first
stage of DRL training then proceeds to build a control policy around this trajectory, caching the solution to
a light neural network. In the second stage of DRL training we replace the trajectory tracking optimization
with one that directly optimizes task performance and introduce uncertainties in the training environment.
This allows us to further adapt the policy from the first stage, making it robust and independent from the
initial demonstration. As a final result, we get a policy that can be directly deployed on the real system
without any additional training.

**2.1 Trajectory optimization**

Generating initial demonstration.We use trajectory optimization to generate a nominal motion for
the desired task based on a nominal model of the robot and the environment. In this work, we use the
trajectory optimization algorithm proposed in (Ponton et al., 2021) to compute such demonstrations. It is
important to emphasize that any other trajectory optimization algorithm could also be used, as long as it
provides a set of full-body trajectories. However, the more realistic the generated motion is, the easier it
is for the first stage of DRL to find a policy that tracks it. In addition, we do not utilize control actions
provided by the demonstration trajectory. Only the state trajectories are required. This allows us to use any
control parametrization for the policy being learned, potentially different than the one used to generate
the demonstration. For instance, it is well known that having the policy output the next desired state for a
fixed PD controller (rather than torque) is beneficial in terms of transfer to the real world (Hwangbo et al.,
2019; Bogdanovic et al., 2020; Siekmann et al., 2021). However, finding these actions in a trajectory
optimization setting is not necessarily trivial.

**2.2 DRL stage 1: Learning a policy to track a given trajectory**

Control policy.We use a neural network to parametrize the control policy. A relatively small network
proved sufficient for the tasks we considered, with two layers of 64 units each. We keep the observation
space of the policy simple, with the positions and velocities for each joint (qjoint,q ̇joint) and only robot


base variables relevant for the current task. For the hopping task, this consists of the base position and
velocity along the Z-axis (zbase,z ̇base). For the bounding task we also add the angular position and velocity
around Y-axis (θbasey ,θ ̇ybase).

The policy outputs parameters for a PD controller in joint space. It gives desired joint positions at each
step, while utilizing fixed P and D gains for control.

Throughout all the stages of training, we use an additional cost term incentivizing the policy to output
values for desired joint positions that are actually tracked as well as possible. Specifically, we penalize the
difference between the value given for the desired position by the policy at steptand the actual position
achieved at the next stept+ 1:

```
rtt=−ktt
```
### ∥∥

```
∥qjointdes (t)−qjoint(t+ 1)
```
### ∥∥

### ∥

```
2
(1)
```
We note that while this reward term incentivizes a policy to produce a trajectory that is well tracked, it
does not prevent it to give values off the trajectory to create forces during contact when necessary. This
has been a crucial aspect of our previous work (Bogdanovic et al., 2020) to enable direct policy transfer
to real robots without domain randomization of robot parameters.

Training procedure.We use Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) to optimize
the policies, but we do not have many requirements in the choice of the algorithm. As we use the provided
demonstration to resolve exploration issues, we do not need a, potentially off-policy, reinforcement
learning algorithm with strong characteristics in this regard. We instead choose an on-policy algorithm
with good convergence properties.

In this stage, the optimized reward consists of two parts: a part for tracking the time-based demonstration
and the above-defined regularization term that is a part of the controller parametrization:

```
rs 1 =rti+rtt
```
```
rti=kti 1 exp
```
### (

```
−kti 2 ‖xbasedemo−xbase‖
```
### )

```
+kti 3 exp
```
### (

```
−kti 4 ‖x ̇basedemo−x ̇base‖
```
### )

```
+kti 5 exp
```
### (

```
−kti 6 ‖qbasedemo qbase‖
```
### )

```
+kti 7 exp
```
### (

```
−kti 8 ‖ωbasedemo−ωbase‖
```
### )

```
+kti 9 exp
```
### (

```
−kti 10 ‖qjointdemo−qjoint‖
```
### )

```
+kti 11 exp
```
### (

```
−kti 12 ‖q ̇jointdemo−q ̇joint‖
```
### )

```
rttas defined in (1),
```
### (2)

wherexbaseis the position of the robot base,qbasethe base quaternion,ωbasethe base angular velocity
andqjointthe joint positions.kti 1 , ...,kti 12 represent individual weight and scale constants for each term.
We mark difference between two quaternions with.

Following (Peng et al., 2018), we make two further design choices that prove to be vital in making the
training robustly work:


- We initialize each episode at a randomly chosen point on the demonstration trajectory.
- We terminate episodes early if the robot enters states that are not likely to be recoverable (based for
    example on tilt angle of the robot base) or just not conducive for learning (for example knees of the
    robot making contact with the ground).

Output.In the first DRL stage, we aim to produce a policy that provides some nominal behavior on the
task in simulation. However, in our experiments, these policies failed to transfer to the real robot. They
remain static, cause shaky behavior on the robot, or result in motions with severe impacts (examples in
the accompanying video). To solve these problems, we need an additional stage of training that generates
policies that can transfer to the real robot.

**2.3 DRL stage 2: Generating robust time-independent policy**

To create policies that are successfully transferable to the real robot, we continue training starting from
the policies outputted from the first stage, introducing the following changes in the training procedure:

Initialization.We replace initialization on the demonstrated trajectories with initialization in a wider
range of states. This allows us to better cover the range of states the policy might observe when deployed
on the real system, allowing it to learn how to recover and continue the motion in those cases.

Environment uncertainties. We introduce uncertainties in the environment in order to produce
more robust motions when deployed on the real system. In this work, we are mainly concerned with
randomization of the contact surface heights and friction.

Time-independent task reward.We replace the time-based demonstration tracking reward with a time-
independent, direct task reward. We have already noted the issues that can arise while trying to account
for environment uncertainties while tracking a time-based demonstration trajectory. The policy is locked
into trying to follow the specific time schedule regardless of the environment, whereas adapting it would
produce much better recovery behavior. Switching to a time-independent reward, directly defining the
task helps us deal with this.

Switching to this task reward has additional benefits. It allows us to directly optimize desirable aspects
of the task, whereas the demonstration only needs to give us some nominal behavior on the task. The
policy is free to change the behavior in a way that is needed to perform the task in the best possible way,
without being penalized for not doing it in the same way as in the demonstration. We can also, as we will
see later, produce varied behavior starting from a single demonstration by adapting this task reward.

Regularization rewards.Finally, we add additional reward terms in this stage to further regularize
the behavior of the learned policies. We aim to incentivize desirable aspects of policies in the tasks, like
torque smoothness and smooth contact transitions.

## 3 EVALUATION

**3.1 Tasks setup**

We evaluate our approach on two different dynamic tasks on a quadruped robot: hopping and bounding.
In both cases we start from a basic demonstration trajectory that provides state trajectories for the current
task. Starting from that we apply our two-step training procedure in simulation to produce robust policies
that we then test on a real robot.


Figure 2. Examples of the robustness tests carried out on the quadruped robot Solo8.(A)Hopping on a
surface comprised of a soft mattress and small blocks.(B)Hopping with push recovery.(C)Bounding on
a surface comprised of a soft mattress and small blocks.(D)Bounding with push recovery.

We perform experiments on the open-source torque-controlled quadruped robot, Solo8 (Grimminger
et al., 2020) (see Fig. 2), which is capable of very dynamic behaviors. For simulating the system we use
PyBullet (Coumans and Bai, 2016–2020).

We use exactly the same training procedure in both cases, with the only differences arising from the
need to allow for base rotation around one axis in the bounding task. This is a particular benefit of the
approach we present here – for a new task we only need a single new demonstration trajectory and a single
simple reward term defining the task.

DRL stage 1: Early termination.The only aspect in the first stage of training specific to the chosen
tasks is how we perform early termination. We perform early stopping here based on the current tilt of the
robot base (we increase the range appropriately for the bounding task), as well as when any part of the
robot that is not the foot touches the ground.

DRL stage 2: Initialization states.As noted in the method description, in the second stage of DRL
training we introduce a wider range of initialization states. In the two tasks investigated here, this consists
of randomizing the initial height of the base of the robot, tilt of the base aroundx- and y-axis and
randomness in the initial joint configuration. We preserve the early termination criteria from stage 1,
only extending the range of allowed base tilt angles with the way it is increased in the initialization.

DRL stage 2: Environment uncertainties.We also introduce uncertainties in the training environment.
We randomize the ground position up and down in the range of [−5 cm,5 cm] (approximately 20% of the
robot leg length). We also randomize the ground surface friction coefficient in the range[0. 5 , 1 .0]. While
we restrict ourselves only to this limited set of initial state and environment randomizations, as we will
see in the later evaluations, this produces policies that are quite robust as they can also handle uneven
ground or external perturbations.


DRL stage 2: Reward structure (hopping). By using a demonstration trajectory to deal with
exploration issues, we can define the individual task rewards to be very simple, without the need for
any reward shaping.

```
For the hopping task we use the following reward
```
```
rs 2 hp=rhp+rps+rct+rts+rtt (3)
```
```
We use therhpreward term to define the task
```
```
rhp=
```
### {

```
khpzbase, ifzbasemin< zbase< zmaxbase,
0 , otherwise.
```
### (4)

The reward at each timestep is proportional to the current height of the robot base (zbase), with constant
weightkhp. It is clipped to zero below a certain threshold (zminbase), one that the robot can reach without
leaving the ground. We additionally clip the value of this reward to be zero above a certain height threshold
(zmaxbase) to incentivize lower hops. We will additionally vary this threshold to produce policies with different
hopping heights starting from the same demonstration trajectory.

We also introduce several reward terms to incentivize different desirable aspects in the resulting
behavior. They reward the base to be close to its horizontal default posture (rps) and smooth contact
transitions (rct) and torque smoothness (rts).

We reward the policy for being static in all the base dimensions (positions (xbase,ybase) and Euler angles
(θbasex ,θybase,θbasez )) except the one the motion is performed on (z-axis in this case). Withkps 1 , ...,kps 10
being weight and scale constants.

```
rps=kps 1 exp
```
### (

```
−kps 2 |xbase|^2
```
### )

```
+kps 3 exp
```
### (

```
−kps 4 |ybase|^2
```
### )

```
+kps 5 exp
```
### (

```
−kps 6 |θbasex |^2
```
### )

```
+kps 7 exp
```
### (

```
−kps 8 |θbasey |^2
```
### )

```
+kps 9 exp
```
### (

```
−kps 10 |θzbase|^2
```
### )

### (5)

This term is crucial as it drives the policy to stay at the default posture as much as possible. Without it
the policy could perform the task well in the simulation while always being close to falling over – which
would likely happen when it was transferred to the real system.

```
The second key reward term asks for smooth contact transition (rct)
```
```
rct=
```
### 

### 

### 

```
−kct
```
### ∑^4

```
i=
```
```
Fif oot, if
```
### ∑^4

```
i=
```
```
Fif oot> Flimitf oot,
```
```
0 , otherwise.
```
### (6)


We do so by simply penalizing any contact force values (Fif oot) above a certain threshold (Flimitf oot), to
penalize impact, withkctbeing a constant weight. Without this term we would have the feet hitting the
surface hard on each landing – this is precisely what we observe in policies from DRL stage 1 where this
reward term is not present. This is not the kind of behavior desired on the real system and these impacts can
cause actual damage to the robot. These types of policies also transfer less well between simulation and
real world. They can learn to perform the task well in simulation by generating hard impacts, but doing
so exploits the weaknesses of the contact model in simulation, resulting in a poor performance when
transferred to the real system. Smooth contact transitions enable a better transition between simulation
and the real system. Thus, policies which incentivize those better transfer to the real system.

The third reward term (rts) prevents the policy to ask for a very quick change in the desired torque which
is not realizable on the real robot with a limited control bandwidth

```
rts=−kts 1 exp
```
### (

```
kts 2 ‖τ(t)−τ(t−1)‖
```
### )

### (7)

withτbeing the joint torque andkts 1 andkts 2 weight and scale constants respectively.

The final reward termrttis the same one we use in the first stage of training (as defined in (1)).
DRL stage 2: Reward structure (bounding).For the bounding task, we only make changes to the
parts of the reward defining the task:

```
rs 2 bn=rbn+rcc+rps+rct+rts+rtt (8)
```
We define the task reward here in two parts,rbnandrcc.rbnrewards the policy for being close to the
path the demonstration takes in the[zbase,θbasey ]space

```
rbn=−kbnmin
i
```
```
‖(zi−zbase,θiy−θybase)‖ (9)
```
withkbnbeing a constant weight. We do this with no concept of time in this case, by just taking the
distance to the closest point. This gives the policy freedom to perform the motion slower or faster, with
different amplitude. We will later see that this results in a variety in bounding behaviors from repeated
trainings, independent of the timing in the original demonstration.

```
The second part of the task reward,rcc, is related to the contact state
```
```
rcc=
```
### 

### 

### 

### 

### 

```
kcc, only front two legs in contact,
kcc, only back two legs in contact,
kcc, no legs in contact,
0 , otherwise.
```
### (10)

withkccbeing a constant reward. It incentivizes the policy to, when making contact with the ground, only
do so with front or back legs at the same time. Without anything to incentivize the policy to do this, we
have observed DRL stage 1 policies reproducing the bounding motion while keeping all feet in contact
with the ground. This reward part ensures appropriate contact states with flight phases in between.

We keep the other reward terms, ones used to incentivize desired aspects of the behavior, the same as in
the hopping task (rttas defined in (1),rct,rtsas defined in (7)). The one change we make is to the reward


```
0. 00
```
```
0. 25
```
```
0. 50
```
```
0. 75
```
```
1. 00
```
```
Base Z-axis position [m]
```
(^012) Time [s] 3 4 5 6
0
5
10
15
20
Estimated contact force [N]
Figure 3. Hopping experiments started from different initial heights. The top figure shows that after
dropping the robot from a set of different heights ranging between 0.3-1 m, the robot quickly goes back to
the nominal behavior which is hopping with the maximum height of 0.5 m. The bottom figure shows that,
dropping from different initial heights, the robot is able to adapt its landing such that the impact forces
remain very low and almost invisible in the estimated force.
incentivizing the robot base staying close to the default posture,rps
rps=kps 1 exp

### (

```
−kps 2 |xbase|^2
```
### )

```
+kps 3 exp
```
### (

```
−kps 4 |ybase|^2
```
### )

```
+kps 5 exp
```
### (

```
−kps 6 |θbasex |^2
```
### )

```
+kps 7 exp
```
### (

```
−kps 8 |θbasez |^2
```
### )

### (11)

We do not reward staying at default posture in theθbasey direction in this case, as that is the angle the robot
is moving around while bounding.

**3.2 Hopping task results**

Figure 3 shows results when the real robot is dropped from different heights to start the motion. We
show the base height and estimated contact force for one of the legs as a function of time. As we do not
have force sensors in the feet, we estimate the contact forces based on the torques the robot applies, using
Fif oot= (SiJiT)−^1 Siτ, whereSiandJiare the joint selection matrix of the legiand Jacobian of the
footi, respectively. Note that this estimation ignores the energy dissipated through damping of the robot
structure and drive system. However, it provides an approximate measure of contact forces sufficient for
the analyses of this paper. We further align the plots based on the later part of the motion – the stable cycle
the robot gets into.

First, we can note that regardless of the drop height the robot goes into the same stable hopping cycle.
What is more, it does so very quickly, as we can see all the individual rollouts matching after only two
hops. We can also note here the benefits of time independence of the policy. It is what allows us to be able
to start the motion from this large range of initial heights. It is also what enables this fast stabilization, as
we can see that the two initial hops are on a different cycle – one needed to stabilize the motion properly.


This test also highlights the general quality of contact interaction achieved with this approach. We can
see that the impact forces, even on the highest drop (1 mheight), barely go over the force values for
the stable hopping cycle (50 cmheight). This is purely learned behavior, as a result of impact penalties
introduced in stage 2 of DRL training. It is not present in the demonstration and when we test DRL stage
1 policies on the real system high impact forces are generated and the policies are very fragile. Smooth
contact transitions can also be observed in the accompanying video.

Further, the behavior is robust to uneven terrain and external pushes although this was never explicitly
trained for. The robot is able to recover from significant tilt of the base arising from either external pushes
or landing on an uneven surface (Fig. 2A, 2B). More extensive examples of recovery behavior can be seen
in the accompanying video.

Finally, we demonstrate the variety of robust behaviors that can be optimized from the same
demonstration by doing repeated trainings with different values of thezmaxbasethreshold in the hopping
task reward. With this simple change in the task reward, starting from one demonstration, we can produce
hopping behaviors at different heights. Examples of this can be seen in the accompanying video.

**3.3 Bounding task results**

In Fig. 4 we show results for a test where we drop the robot from different angles to start the motion.
We perform the same test for two different final DRL stage 2 policies for this task. We can see that the
policies can handle a wide range of initial base angles – around 35 degrees in both directions. What is
more, as was the case with the hopping task, we can see that here as well all the initializations end up in
the same stable motion cycle.

The bounding motion exhibits similar robustness to uneven terrain and external perturbations as the
hopping motion (Fig. 2C, 2D). Same as with the hopping task, the policies rely on their knowledge of
how to handle a varied set of base states to recover from anything that arises from these conditions even
through it was not explicitly trained for.

In this task, we would also like to demonstrate the variety of behaviors we can generate from one single
demonstration. Unlike in the hopping task, where we made simple changes in the task reward to achieve
different jumping heights, we instead give more freedom to the task reward and examine the variety of
produced behaviors. As noted in the task reward definition, the policy has the freedom to produce slower
or faster bounds with smaller or larger amplitudes. As seen in the accompanying video we arrive at a
variety of bounding behaviors in this way, starting from the same initial demonstration trajectory.

## 4 DISCUSSION

Simplicity and generality of the approach.One of the main benefits of the approach is its generality
and simplicity. The only elements needed for each new task, as can be seen from the two tasks studied
here, are a single demonstration trajectory and a direct straightforward task reward.

The demonstration does not need to provide ideal performance on the task, as we optimize task
performance in the later stage of training. It simply needs to provide a sequence of states, and not
necessarily actions, that enable a decent performance. Providing only states is also simpler in cases where
it is not trivial to calculate the exact forces to realize a particular motion.

As for the task reward, reward shaping is not needed, as the demonstration resolves any exploration
issues that could occur as a result of sparse reward signal. We can directly reward aspects of the task of


Figure 4.Two different bounding behaviors on the robot with different initial conditions. Starting with a
wide range of initial angles for the base in y-direction (roughly between -35 to 35 deg), the robot quickly
converges back to the desired behavior.

interest. We keep reward terms other than the task reward as general as possible, encoding characteristics
of general good robot behavior. We expect those to remain constant across a varied range of tasks.

Reinforcement learning perspective. From the reinforcement learning perspective our approach
presents a simple and effective way to deal with exploration issues in robotic tasks. We also remove
the trajectory tracking reward in the second stage of our training, so, as seen in our experiments, we are
able to change the policy away from the exact behavior defined in the demonstration.

Trajectory optimization perspective. From the trajectory optimization perspective, our approach
proposes a systematic way to consider different types of uncertainty and find a robust control policy for
robotic tasks, especially those with contact. Furthermore, our approach caches the solution of a model-
based approach for future use and eliminates the need for re-generating repetitive motions. We believe
this is a practical way to combine the strength of trajectory optimization and reinforcement learning for
continuous control problems; 1) Trajectory optimization is used to generate a desired behavior efficiently
to achieve the task at hand 2) different types of realistic uncertainties are easily added to the simulation,
e.g. contact timing uncertainty, and DRL is used to produce a robust feedback policy.
